.. _adaptive-biasing-force:

Adaptive Biasing Force Algorithm
--------------------------------

Introduction
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Relative to most other free energy methods, which are based on adding biases
to the Hamiltonian of a system to obtain a flat histogram in converged
sampling, the adaptive biasing force method (ABF) is unique, as it seeks a
flattening of the generalized force. Like flat histogram methods, this bias
force is applied until the landscape seen by a simulation is flat in
collective variable (CV) space and freely diffusive sampling is achieved.

In practice, ABF functions by partitioning relevant CV space into histogram-
like bins with a grid, and keeping a running tabulation of the number of
visits to each bin. Concurrently, a running sum of the instantaneous
generalized force experienced by the system. Putting these together gives an
estimate for the mean generalized force, and integrating this quantity yields
the free energy. Note that this means ABF returns a vector field rather than a
free energy surface (which is the output of most methods.) Ref [R1]_ contains
an excellent write-up on the method in general. The specific implementation in
SSAGES is discussed in Ref. [R2]_.


.. note::

    An integrator for 1D, 2D and 3D surfaces are provided in SSAGES/Tools/ABF_integrator (requires numpy, scipy and matplotlib). Syntax is below; this is illustrated further in the tutorial found on this page.

.. code-block:: bash

    ./ABF_integrator.py -i <inputfile> -o <outputname> -p <bool> (<bool> <bool>) --interpolate <integer> (<integer> <integer>) --scale <float>

Implementation Notes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

ABF calculates a generalized force on CVs at each timestep, and biases
simulations using the negative of the estimated generalized force. This
requires a grid, which requires that you define a CV range. Outside of the CV
range, the simulation will continue to run, but the grid does not extend
there, so there is no bias applied and no histogram hits are collected.
histogram hits will be collected.


ABF can restart from a previous run. Simply include Fworld_cvX and Nworld
outputs generated by the previous run in your working directory, and set the
'restart' option to true.

.. warning::

  ABF keeps only a single backup of old files, and overwrites older backups
  with new data if they already exist. If restarting, a backup will not be
  created, instead ABF will read from and update the newest files. If you want
  to keep a copy of the output from a previous run after restart, be sure to
  rename the output or place a copy in a different directory.


If you are using the multiple walkers option, they will read from and write to
the same histogram and force estimate during runtime. The resulting histogram
and force data are saved in the same way as single-walker simulations.

ABF can optionally define a restraint range, which biases simulations back
toward the region of interest using a harmonic restraint with user-chosen
spring constant(s). To disable restraints, enter a spring constant k equal to
or less than zero. 

.. warning ::

  The restraint range should be WIDER than the CV range by at least one bin size
  in each direction. 

If restraints are used on a periodic system, one can define the periodic
boundaries, so that minimum image convention to CVs can be applied using the
commands ``CV_periodic_boundary_upper_bounds`` and
``CV_periodic_boundary_lower_bounds``. For example, on a :math:`-\pi` to
:math:`\pi` CV, if the CV is restrained between -3.14 to -2.36 and the system
crosses the periodic boundary, setting this will ensure the restraint is
applied correctly back towards -3.14 rather than applying an incorrect a large
force to push it toward -2.36.

Example Input
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: javascript

    "methods" : [
        {
            "type" : "ABF",
            "cvs" : [0,1],
            "CV_lower_bounds" : [-3.14, -3.14],
            "CV_upper_bounds" : [3.14, 3.14],
            "CV_bins" : [21,21],
            "CV_restraint_minimums" : [-5,-5],
            "CV_restraint_maximums" : [5,5],
            "CV_restraint_spring_constants" : [0,0],
            "CV_isperiodic" : [false,false],
            "timestep" : 0.002,
            "minimum_count" : 50,
            "output_file" : "F_out",
            "output_frequency" : 1000,
            "unit_conversion" : 1,
            "frequency" : 1
        }
    ]

.. warning:: 

    Be sure to follow correct JSON syntax for your input, with a comma after every line except the last within each bracket.


Options & Parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Define ABF**:

In the methods block, define the ABF method through the syntax: 

.. code-block:: javascript

    "type" : "ABF"

**Define CVs**

To define the collective variables:

.. code-block:: javascript 

   "cvs" : [0,1]

In the example input, this defines a two-dimensional CV-space to be sampled by ABF, with indices [0,1]. The argument to this must be a list of integers defining the CVs to be operated on by ABF. 

**Define the grid**

To define the bounds:

.. code-block:: javascript

    "CV_lower_bounds" : [-3.14, -3.14] 
    "CV_upper_bounds" : [3.14, 3.14]

Thee are arrays of doubles whose length is the number of CVs used. This
defines the minimum and maximum values for the CVs for the range in which the
method will be used in order.

To define the number of CV bins used:

.. code-block:: javascript

    "CV_bins" : [21,21]

This array of integers defines the number of histogram bins in each CV dimension in order.


**Define the restraints**

.. code-block:: javascript

    "CV_restraint_minimums" : [-5,-5],
    "CV_restraint_maximums" : [5,5],

These arrays define the minimum and maximum values for the CV restraints in order. 

.. code-block:: javascript  

    "CV_restraint_spring_constants" : [0,0],

This array defines the spring constants for the CV restraints in order.
Enter a value equal to or less than zero to turn restraints off.

.. code-block:: javascript  

    "CV_isperiodic" : [false,false],

    This array defines whether a given CV is periodic for restraint purposes.
    This is only used to apply minimum image convention to CV restraints. The
    value can be safely set to false *even for periodic CVs* if no restraints
    are being used. 

.. warning::

    If ANY CV is set to periodic, then ``CV_periodic_boundary_lower_bounds``
    and  ``CV_periodic_boundary_upper_bounds`` must be provided for ALL CVs.
    Values entered for non-periodic CVs are not used.

.. code-block:: javascript  
    
    "CV_periodic_boundary_lower_bounds" : [-3.14, -3.14],
    "CV_periodic_boundary_upper_bounds" : [3.14, 3.14],

These arrays define the lower and upper end of the period. This only matters if ``CV_isperiodic`` is true for the CV.


**Define time and unit parameters**

.. code-block:: javascript

    "timestep" : 0.002,

The timestep of the simulation. Units depend on the conversion factor that
follows. This must be entered correctly, otherwise the generalized force estimate
will be incorrect.

.. code-block:: javascript

    "unit_conversion" : 1,
    
Defines the unit conversion from d(momentum)/d(time) to force for the simulation. For LAMMPS using units real, this is 2390.06 (gram.angstrom/mole.femtosecond^2 -> kcal/mole.angstrom) For GROMACS, this is 1.

.. code-block:: javascript

    "minimum_count" : 50,

This is the number of hits required to a bin in the general histogram before
the full bias is active. Below this value, the bias linearly decreases to
equal 0 at hits = 0. Default = 200, but user should provide a reasonable
value for their system. See [R1]_ and [R2]_ for more details.

**Output parameters**

.. code-block:: javascript

    "output_frequency" : 1000,

*Optional*: This defines how many timesteps pass in between output of the generalized force.

.. code-block:: javascript

    "output_file" : "F_out",
    
This is a string value defining the file name for the adaptive vector force field that is acquired. The default name is "F_out". 

.. code-block:: javascript
    
    "Fworld_output_file" : "Fworld_cv"

*Optional*: This is the name of the file to backup raw Fworld force output for use in restarts. There will be separate outputs for each CV. The default filename is Fworld_cv, which saves each CV's output to Fworld_cvX.

.. code-block:: javsscript
    
    "Nworld_output_file" : "Nworld"

*Optional*: This is name of the file which backs up the raw histogram data for restart purposes. The default filename is "Nworld".

**Optional Parameters**

.. code-block:: javascript

    "mass_weighting" : false,

Turns on/off mass weighing of the adaptive force. The default is false, which
turns off the weighting.

.. warning::

    Leave this off if your system has massless sites such as in TIP4P water.


.. code-block:: javascript

    "restart" : "false"

This boolean determines whether the simulation is a restart. The default value is false. If set to true, ABF will attempt to load a previous state from Nworld and Fworld files.

.. code-block:: javascript

    "frequency" : 1  

Leave at 1. 


Output
^^^^^^

The main output of the method is stored in a file specified in 'filename'. This 
file will contain the Adaptive Force vector field printed out every 
'backup_frequency' steps and at the end of a simulation. The method outputs a vector 
field, with vectors defined on each point on a grid that goes from 
(CV_lower_bounds) to (CV_upper_bounds) of each CV in its dimension, with (CV_bins) of grid points 
in each dimension. For example, for 2 CVs defined from (-1,1) and (-1,0) with 3 and
2 bins respectively would be a 3x2 grid (6 grid points). The printout is in the
following format: 2*N number of columns, where N is the number of CVs. First N columns 
are coordinates in CV space, the N+1 to 2N columns are components of the Adaptive Force 
vectors. An example for N=2 is:

+-----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
| CV1 Coord | CV2 Coord | d(A)/d(CV1) | d(A)/d(CV2) |
+===========+===========+=============+=============+
| -1        | -1        | -1          | 1           |
+-----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
| -1        | 0         | 2           | 1           |
+-----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
| 0         | -1        | 1           | 2           |
+-----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
| 0         | 0         | 2           | 3           |
+-----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
| 1         | -1        | 2           | 4           |
+-----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+
| 1         | 0         | 3           | 5           |
+-----------+-----------+-------------+-------------+

.. _ABF-tutorial:

Tutorial
^^^^^^^^

Alanine Dipeptide

For LAMMPS (must be built with RIGID and MOLECULE packages)
To build RIGID and MOLECULE: 

1) Go to LAMMPS src folder (/build/hooks/lammps/lammps-download-prefix/src/lammps-download/src/ for -DLAMMPS=YES)
2) Do:

.. code-block:: bash

   make yes-RIGID
   make yes-MOLECULE

3) Go to your build folder and make.

Find the following input files in Examples/User/ABF/Example_AlanineDipeptide:

* ``in.ADP_ABF_Example(0-1)`` (2 files)
* ``example.input``
* ``ADP_ABF_1walker.json``
* ``ADP_ABF_2walkers.json``

1) Put the contents of ABF_ADP_LAMMPS_Example folder in your ssages build folder
2) For a single walker example, do:

.. code-block:: bash

    ./ssages ADP_ABF_1walker.json.json
    
For 2 walkers, do:

.. code-block:: bash

    mpirun -np 2 ./ssages ADP_ABF_2walkers.json

For GROMACS:

Optional:

* ``adp.gro``
* ``topol.top``
* ``nvt.mdp``

Required:

* ``example_adp(0-1).tpr`` (2 files)
* ``ADP_ABF_1walker.json``
* ``ADP_ABF_2walkers.json``

1) Put the contents of ABF_ADP_Gromacs_Example in your ssages build folder
2) For a single walker example, do:

.. code-block:: bash

    ./ssages ABF_ADP_1walker.json

For 2 walkers, do:

.. code-block:: bash

    mpirun -np 2 ./ssages ABF_ADP_2walkers.json

These will run using the pre-prepared input files in .tpr format. If you wish to
prepare the input files yourself using GROMACS tools (if compiled with -DGROMACS=YES):

.. code-block:: bash

    /build/hooks/gromacs/gromacs/bin/gmx_mpi grompp -f nvt.mdp -p topol.top -c adp.gro -o example_adp0.tpr
    /build/hooks/gromacs/gromacs/bin/gmx_mpi grompp -f nvt.mdp -p topol.top -c adp.gro -o example_adp1.tpr

Be sure to change the seed in .mdp files for random velocity generation, 
so walkers can explore different places on the free energy surface.

Multiple walkers initiated from different seeds will
explore different regions and will all contribute to the same adaptive force.

After the run is finished, you can check that your output matches the sample
outputs given in the examples folders:

1) Copy ABF_integrator.py (requires numpy, scipy and matplotlib) into your build folder.
2) Run the integrator:

.. code-block:: bash

    python ABF_integrator.py --periodic1 True --periodic2 True --interpolate 200

3) This will output a contour map, a gradient field and a heatmap. Compare these to the sample outputs.




Sodium Chloride

For LAMMPS (must be built with KSPACE and MOLECULE packages)
To build RIGID and MOLECULE: 

1) Go to LAMMPS src folder (/build/hooks/lammps/lammps-download-prefix/src/lammps-download/src/ for -DLAMMPS=YES)
2) Do:

.. code-block:: bash

   make yes-KSPACE
   make yes-MOLECULE

3) Go to your build folder and make.

Find the following input files in Examples/User/ABF/Example_NaCl/ABF_NaCl_LAMMPS_Example:

* ``in.NaCl_ADP_example(0-1)`` (2 files)
* ``data.spce``
* ``ADP_NaCl_1walker.json``
* ``ADP_NaCl_2walkers.json``

1) Put the contents of ABF_NaCl_LAMMPS_Example folder in your ssages build folder
2) For a single walker example, do:

.. code-block:: bash

    ./ssages ADP_NaCl_1walker.json.json
    
For 2 walkers, do:

.. code-block:: bash

    mpirun -np 2 ./ssages ADP_NaCl_2walkers.json

For GROMACS:

Optional:

* ``NaCl.gro``
* ``topol.top``
* ``npt.mdp``

Required:

* ``example_NaCl(0-1).tpr`` (2 files)
* ``ADP_NaCl_1walker.json``
* ``ADP_NaCl_2walkers.json``

1) Put the contents of ABF_NaCl_Gromacs_Example in your ssages build folder
2) For a single walker example, do:

.. code-block:: bash

    ./ssages ABF_NaCl_1walker.json

For 2 walkers, do:

.. code-block:: bash

    mpirun -np 2 ./ssages ABF_NaCl_2walkers.json

These will run using the pre-prepared input files in .tpr format. If you wish to
prepare the input files yourself using GROMACS tools (if compiled with -DGROMACS=YES):

.. code-block:: bash

    /build/hooks/gromacs/gromacs/bin/gmx_mpi grompp -f npt.mdp -p topol.top -c NaCl.gro -o example_NaCl0.tpr
    /build/hooks/gromacs/gromacs/bin/gmx_mpi grompp -f npt.mdp -p topol.top -c NaCl.gro -o example_NaCl1.tpr

Be sure to change the seed in .mdp files for random velocity generation, 
so walkers can explore different places on the free energy surface.

Multiple walkers initiated from different seeds will
explore different regions and will all contribute to the same adaptive force.

After the run is finished, you can check that your output matches the sample
outputs given in the examples folders:

1) Copy ABF_integrator.py (requires numpy, scipy and matplotlib) into your build folder.
2) Run the integrator:

.. code-block:: bash

    python ABF_integrator.py

3) This will output a Potential of Mean Force graph. Compare this to the sample output.


Developers
^^^^^^^^^^

Emre Sevgen
Hythem Sidky

References
^^^^^^^^^^

.. [R1] `J. Comer, et al.` J. Phys. Chem. B., **119**, 1129--1151 (2015). `Link <http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/jp506633n>`__.

.. [R2] `E. Darve, D. Rodriguez-Gomez and A. Pohorille,` J. Chem. Phys., **128**, 144120 (2008). `Link <http://mc.stanford.edu/cgi-bin/images/0/06/Darve_2008.pdf>`__.